The Prologue

Two households, both alike in dignity
(In fair Verona, where we lay our scene),
From ancient grudge break to new mutiny,
Where civil blood makes civil hands unclean.
From forth the fatal loins of these two foes
A pair of star-crossed lovers take their life;
Whose misadventured piteous overthrows
Doth with their death bury their parents’ strife.
The fearful passage of their death-marked love
And the continuance of their parents’ rage,
Which, but their children’s end, naught could remove,
Is now the two hours’ traffic of our stage;
The which, if you with patient ears attend,
What here shall miss, our toil shall strive to mend.

Act 1, Scene 1

Enter Sampson and Gregory, with swords and bucklers, of the house of Capulet.

Sampson: Gregory, on my word we’ll not carry coals.

Gregory: No, for then we should be colliers.

Sampson: I mean, an we be in choler, we’ll draw.

Gregory: Ay, while you live, draw your neck out of collar.

Sampson: I strike quickly, being moved.

Gregory: But thou art not quickly moved to strike.

Sampson: A dog of the house of Montague moves me.

Gregory: To move is to stir, and to be valiant is to stand. Therefore if thou art moved thou runn’st away.

Sampson: A dog of that house shall move me to stand. I will take the wall of any man or maid of Montague’s.

Gregory: That shows thee a weak slave, for the weakest goes to the wall.

Sampson: ’Tis true, and therefore women, being the weaker vessels, are ever thrust to the wall. Therefore I will push Montague’s men from the wall and thrust his maids to the wall.

Gregory: The quarrel is between our masters and us their men.

Sampson: ’Tis all one. I will show myself a tyrant. When I have fought with the men, I will be civil with the maids; I will cut off their heads.

Gregory: The heads of the maids?

Sampson: Ay, the heads of the maids, or their maidenheads. Take it in what sense thou wilt.

Gregory: They must take it in sense that feel it.

Sampson: Me they shall feel while I am able to stand, and ’tis known I am a pretty piece of flesh.

Gregory: ’Tis well thou art not fish; if thou hadst, thou hadst been poor-john. Draw thy tool. Here comes of the house of Montagues.

Enter Abram with another Servingman.

Sampson: My naked weapon is out. Quarrel, I will back thee.

Gregory: How? Turn thy back and run?

Sampson: Fear me not.

Gregory: No, marry. I fear thee!

Sampson: Let us take the law of our sides; let them begin.

Gregory: I will frown as I pass by, and let them take it as they list.

Sampson: Nay, as they dare. I will bite my thumb at them, which is disgrace to them if they bear it.

Abram: Do you bite your thumb at us, sir?

Sampson: I do bite my thumb, sir.

Abram: Do you bite your thumb at us, sir?

Benvolio: Put up your swords. You know not what you do.

(Enter Tybalt, drawing his sword.)

Tybalt: What, art thou drawn among these heartless hinds?
Turn thee, Benvolio; look upon thy death.

Benvolio: I do but keep the peace. Put up thy sword,
Or manage it to part these men with me.

Tybalt: What, drawn and talk of peace? I hate the word
As I hate hell, all Montagues, and thee.
Have at thee, coward!

(Enter three or four Citizens with clubs or partisans.)

Citizen: Clubs, bills, and partisans! Strike! Beat them down!
Down with the Capulets! Down with the Montagues!

(Enter old Capulet in his gown, and his Wife.)

Capulet: What noise is this? Give me my long sword, ho!

Lady Capulet: A crutch, a crutch! Why call you for a sword?

(Enter old Montague and his Wife.)

Montague: Thou villain Capulet!—Hold me not; let me go.

Lady Montague: Thou shalt not stir one foot to seek a foe.

(Enter Prince Escalus with his train.)

Prince: Rebellious subjects, enemies to peace,
Profaners of this neighbor-stainèd steel—
Will they not hear?—What ho! You men, you beasts,
That quench the fire of your pernicious rage
With purple fountains issuing from your veins:
On pain of torture, from those bloody hands
Throw your mistempered weapons to the ground,
And hear the sentence of your movèd prince.
Three civil brawls, bred of an airy word
By thee, old Capulet, and Montague,
Have thrice disturbed the quiet of our streets
And made Verona’s ancient citizens
Cast by their grave-beseeming ornaments
To wield old partisans in hands as old,
Cankered with peace, to part your cankered hate.
If ever you disturb our streets again,
Your lives shall pay the forfeit of the peace.
For this time, all the rest depart away.
You, Capulet, shall go along with me,
And, Montague, come you this afternoon
To know our farther pleasure in this case,
To old Free-town, our common judgment-place.
Once more, on pain of death, all men depart.

(All but Montague, Lady Montague, and Benvolio exit.)

Montague: Who set this ancient quarrel new abroach?
Speak, nephew, were you by when it began?

Benvolio: Here were the servants of your adversary,
And yours, close fighting ere I did approach.
I drew to part them. In the instant came
The fiery Tybalt with his sword prepared,
Which, as he breathed defiance to my ears,
He swung about his head and cut the winds,
Who, nothing hurt withal, hissed him in scorn.
While we were interchanging thrusts and blows,
Came more and more and fought on part and part,
Till the Prince came, who parted either part.

Lady Montague: O, where is Romeo? Saw you him today?
Right glad I am he was not at this fray.

Benvolio: Madam, an hour before the worshiped sun
Peered forth the golden window of the east,
A troubled mind drove me to walk abroad,
Where underneath the grove of sycamore
That westward rooteth from this city side,
So early walking did I see your son.
Towards him I made, but he was ’ware of me
And stole into the covert of the wood.
I, measuring his affections by my own,
Pursued my humor, not pursuing his,
And gladly shunned who gladly fled from me.

(Montague and Lady Montague exit.)

(Enter Romeo.)

Benvolio: See where he comes. So please you, step aside.
I’ll know his grievance or be much denied.

Romeo: Good morrow, cousin.

Benvolio: Is the day so young?

Romeo: But new struck nine.

Benvolio: Ay me, sad hours seem long.

Romeo: Was that my father that went hence so fast?

Benvolio: It was. What sadness lengthens Romeo’s hours?

Romeo: Not having that which, having, makes them short.

Benvolio: In love?

Romeo: Out—

Benvolio: Of love?

Romeo: Out of her favor where I am in love.

Benvolio: Alas that love, so gentle in his view,
Should be so tyrannous and rough in proof!

Romeo: Alas that love, whose view is muffled still,
Should without eyes see pathways to his will!
Where shall we dine?—O me! What fray was here?
Yet tell me not, for I have heard it all.
Here’s much to do with hate, but more with love.
Why then, O brawling love, O loving hate,
O anything of nothing first create!
O heavy lightness, serious vanity,
Misshapen chaos of well-seeming forms,
Feather of lead, bright smoke, cold fire, sick health,
Still-waking sleep that is not what it is!
This love feel I, that feel no love in this.



Act 1, Scene 3
(Romeo and Benvolio exit.)

LADY CAPULET:
Nurse, where’s my daughter? Call her forth to me.

NURSE:
Now, by my maidenhead at twelve years old,
I bade her come.—What, lamb! What, ladybird!
God forbid. Where’s this girl? What, Juliet!

(Enter Juliet.)

JULIET:
How now, who calls?

NURSE:
Your mother.

JULIET:
Madam, I am here. What is your will?

LADY CAPULET:
This is the matter.—Nurse, give leave awhile.
We must talk in secret.—Nurse, come back again.
I have remembered me, thou’s hear our counsel.
Thou know’st my daughter’s of a pretty age.

NURSE:
Faith, I can tell her age unto an hour.

LADY CAPULET:
She’s not fourteen.

NURSE:
I’ll lay fourteen of my teeth (and yet, to my teen be it spoken, I have but four) she’s not fourteen.
How long is it now to Lammastide?

LADY CAPULET:
A fortnight and odd days.

NURSE:
Even or odd, of all days in the year,
Come Lammas Eve at night shall she be fourteen.
Susan and she (God rest all Christian souls!)
Were of an age. Well, Susan is with God;
She was too good for me. But, as I said,
On Lammas Eve at night shall she be fourteen.
That shall she. Marry, I remember it well.
’Tis since the earthquake now eleven years,
And she was weaned (I never shall forget it)
Of all the days of the year, upon that day.
For I had then laid wormwood to my dug,
Sitting in the sun under the dovehouse wall.
My lord and you were then at Mantua.

LADY CAPULET:
Enough of this. I pray thee, hold thy peace.

NURSE:
Yes, madam, yet I cannot choose but laugh
To think it should leave crying and say “Ay.”
And yet, I warrant, it had upon its brow
A bump as big as a young cock’rel’s stone,
A perilous knock, and it cried bitterly.
“Yea,” quoth my husband. “Fall’st upon thy face?
Thou wilt fall backward when thou comest to age,
Wilt thou not, Jule?” It stinted and said “Ay.”

JULIET:
And stint thou, too, I pray thee, nurse, say I.

NURSE:
Peace. I have done. God mark thee to his grace,
Thou wast the prettiest babe that e’er I nursed.
An I might live to see thee married once,
I have my wish.

LADY CAPULET:
Marry, that “marry” is the very theme
I came to talk of.—Tell me, daughter Juliet,
How stands your disposition to be married?

JULIET:
It is an honor that I dream not of.

NURSE:
An honor? Were not I thine only nurse,
I would say thou hadst sucked wisdom from thy teat.

LADY CAPULET:
Well, think of marriage now. Younger than you
Here in Verona, ladies of esteem,
Are made already mothers. By my count
I was your mother much upon these years
That you are now a maid. Thus, then, in brief:
The valiant Paris seeks you for his love.

NURSE:
A man, young lady—lady, such a man
As all the world—why, he’s a man of wax.

LADY CAPULET:
Verona’s summer hath not such a flower.

NURSE:
Nay, he’s a flower, in faith, a very flower.

LADY CAPULET:
What say you? Can you love the gentleman?
This night you shall behold him at our feast.
Read o’er the volume of young Paris’ face,
And find delight writ there with beauty’s pen.
Examine every married lineament
And see how one another lends content,
And what obscured in this fair volume lies
Find written in the margent of his eyes.
This precious book of love, this unbound lover,
To beautify him only lacks a cover.
The fish lives in the sea, and ’tis much pride
For fair without the fair within to hide.
That book in many’s eyes doth share the glory
That in gold clasps locks in the golden story.
So shall you share all that he doth possess
By having him, making yourself no less.

NURSE:
No less? Nay, bigger. Women grow by men.

LADY CAPULET:
Speak briefly. Can you like of Paris’ love?

JULIET:
I’ll look to like, if looking liking move.
But no more deep will I endart mine eye
Than your consent gives strength to make it fly.

(Enter Servingman.)

SERVINGMAN:
Madam, the guests are come, supper served up,
You called, my young lady asked for, the
Nurse cursed in the pantry, and everything in
Extremity. I must hence to wait. I beseech you,
Follow straight.

LADY CAPULET:
We follow thee.
Juliet, the County stays.

NURSE:
Go, girl, seek happy nights to happy days.

(They exit.)
Act 1, Scene 4
MERCUTIO:
We’ll have no Cupid hoodwinked with a scarf,
Bearing a Tartar’s painted bow of lath,
Scaring the ladies like a crowkeeper,
Nor no without-book prologue, faintly spoke
After the prompter, for our entrance.
But let them measure us by what they will.
We’ll measure them a measure and be gone.

ROMEO:
Give me a torch. I am not for this ambling.
Being but heavy, I will bear the light.

MERCUTIO:
Nay, gentle Romeo, we must have you dance.

ROMEO:
Not I, believe me. You have dancing shoes
With nimble soles. I have a soul of lead
So stakes me to the ground I cannot move.

MERCUTIO:
You are a lover. Borrow Cupid’s wings
And soar with them above a common bound.

ROMEO:
I am too sore enpiercèd with his shaft
To soar with his light feathers, and so bound
I cannot bound a pitch above dull woe.
Under love’s heavy burden do I sink.

MERCUTIO:
And to sink in it should you burden love—
Too great oppression for a tender thing.

ROMEO:
Is love a tender thing? It is too rough,
Too rude, too boist’rous, and it pricks like thorn.

MERCUTIO:
If love be rough with you, be rough with love.
Prick love for pricking, and you beat love down.—
Give me a case to put my visage in.—
A visor for a visor. What care I
What curious eye doth cote deformities?
Here are the beetle brows shall blush for me.

BENVOLIO:
Come, knock and enter, and no sooner in
But every man betake him to his legs.

ROMEO:
A torch for me. Let wantons light of heart
Tickle the senseless rushes with their heels,
For I am proverbed with a grandsire phrase:
I’ll be a candle holder and look on;
The game was ne’er so fair, and I am done.

MERCUTIO:
Tut, dun’s the mouse, the constable’s own word.
If thou art dun, we’ll draw thee from the mire—
Or, save your reverence, love—wherein thou stickest
Up to the ears. Come, we burn daylight, ho!

ROMEO:
Nay, that’s not so.

MERCUTIO:
I mean, sir, in delay
We waste our lights; in vain, light lights by day.
Take our good meaning, for our judgment sits
Five times in that ere once in our five wits.

ROMEO:
And we mean well in going to this masque,
But ’tis no wit to go.

MERCUTIO:
Why, may one ask?

ROMEO:
I dreamt a dream tonight.

MERCUTIO:
And so did I.

ROMEO:
Well, what was yours?

MERCUTIO:
That dreamers often lie.

ROMEO:
In bed asleep while they do dream things true.

MERCUTIO:
O, then I see Queen Mab hath been with you.

MERCUTIO:
She is the fairies’ midwife, and she comes
In shape no bigger than an agate stone
On the forefinger of an alderman,
Drawn with a team of little atomi
Over men’s noses as they lie asleep.

Her wagon spokes made of long spinners’ legs,
The cover of the wings of grasshoppers,
Her traces of the smallest spider web,
Her collars of the moonshine’s watery beams,
Her whip of cricket’s bone, the lash of film,
Her wagoner a small gray-coated gnat,
Not half so big as a round little worm
Pricked from the lazy finger of a maid.

Her chariot is an empty hazelnut,
Made by the joiner squirrel or old grub,
Time out o’ mind the fairies’ coachmakers.

And in this state she gallops night by night
Through lovers’ brains, and then they dream of love;
On courtiers’ knees, that dream on curtsies straight;
O’er lawyers’ fingers, who straight dream on fees;
O’er ladies’ lips, who straight on kisses dream,
Which oft the angry Mab with blisters plagues
Because their breaths with sweetmeats tainted are.

Sometime she gallops o’er a courtier’s nose,
And then dreams he of smelling out a suit.
And sometime comes she with a tithe-pig’s tail,
Tickling a parson’s nose as he lies asleep;
Then he dreams of another benefice.

Sometime she driveth o’er a soldier’s neck,
And then dreams he of cutting foreign throats,
Of breaches, ambuscadoes, Spanish blades,
Of healths five fathom deep, and then anon
Drums in his ear, at which he starts and wakes
And, being thus frighted, swears a prayer or two
And sleeps again.

This is that very Mab
That plats the manes of horses in the night
And bakes the elflocks in foul sluttish hairs,
Which once untangled, much misfortune bodes.

This is the hag, when maids lie on their backs,
That presses them and learns them first to bear,
Making them women of good carriage.

This is she—

ROMEO:
Peace, peace, Mercutio, peace.
Thou talk’st of nothing.

MERCUTIO:
True, I talk of dreams,
Which are the children of an idle brain,
Begot of nothing but vain fantasy,
Which is as thin of substance as the air
And more inconstant than the wind, who woos
Even now the frozen bosom of the north
And, being angered, puffs away from thence,
Turning his side to the dew-dropping south.

BENVOLIO:
This wind you talk of blows us from ourselves.
Supper is done, and we shall come too late.

ROMEO:
I fear too early, for my mind misgives
Some consequence yet hanging in the stars
Shall bitterly begin his fearful date
With this night’s revels and expire the term
Of a despised life closed in my breast
By some vile forfeit of untimely death.
But he that hath the steerage of my course
Direct my sail. On, lusty gentlemen!

(They march offstage.)
ACT 1, SCENE 5
Music plays and they dance.

CAPULET’S COUSIN
CAPULET
CAPULET'S COUSIN:
You are welcome, gentlemen.—Come, musicians, play.

CAPULET:
A hall, a hall, give room!—And foot it, girls.—
More light, you knaves, and turn the tables up,
And quench the fire; the room is grown too hot.—
Ah, sirrah, this unlooked-for sport comes well.—
Nay, sit, nay, sit, good cousin Capulet,
For you and I are past our dancing days.
How long is ’t now since last yourself and I
Were in a mask?

CAPULET'S COUSIN:
By ’r Lady, thirty years.

CAPULET:
What, man, ’tis not so much, ’tis not so much.
’Tis since the nuptial of Lucentio,
Come Pentecost as quickly as it will,
Some five and twenty years, and then we masked.

CAPULET'S COUSIN:
’Tis more, ’tis more. His son is elder, sir.
His son is thirty.

CAPULET:
Will you tell me that?
His son was but a ward two years ago.

To a Servingman
What lady’s that which doth enrich the hand
Of yonder knight?

SERVINGMAN:
I know not, sir.

ROMEO:
O, she doth teach the torches to burn bright!
It seems she hangs upon the cheek of night
As a rich jewel in an Ethiop’s ear—
Beauty too rich for use, for Earth too dear.
So shows a snowy dove trooping with crows
As yonder lady o’er her fellows shows.
The measure done, I’ll watch her place of stand
And, touching hers, make blessèd my rude hand.
Did my heart love till now? Forswear it, sight,
For I ne’er saw true beauty till this night.

TYBALT
Page exits.

CAPULET
CAPULET:
This, by his voice, should be a Montague.—
Fetch me my rapier, boy.

TYBALT:
What, dares the slave
Come hither covered with an antic face
To fleer and scorn at our solemnity?
Now, by the stock and honor of my kin,
To strike him dead I hold it not a sin.

CAPULET:
Why, how now, kinsman? Wherefore storm you so?

TYBALT:
Uncle, this is a Montague, our foe,
A villain that is hither come in spite
To scorn at our solemnity this night.
Young Romeo is it?

CAPULET:
’Tis he, that villain Romeo.

TYBALT:
Content thee, gentle coz. Let him alone.
He bears him like a portly gentleman,
And, to say truth, Verona brags of him
To be a virtuous and well-governed youth.
I would not for the wealth of all this town
Here in my house do him disparagement.
Therefore be patient. Take no note of him.
It is my will, the which if thou respect,
Show a fair presence and put off these frowns,
An ill-beseeming semblance for a feast.
It fits when such a villain is a guest.

TYBALT:
I’ll not endure him.

CAPULET:
He shall be endured.
What, goodman boy? I say he shall. Go to.
Am I the master here or you? Go to.

TYBALT:
You’ll not endure him! God shall mend my soul.

ROMEO
JULIET
ROMEO:
You’ll make a mutiny among my guests,
You will set cock-a-hoop, you’ll be the man!
Why, uncle, ’tis a shame.

CAPULET:
Go to, go to.
You are a saucy boy. Is ’t so indeed?
This trick may chance to scathe you. I know what.
You must contrary me. Marry, ’tis time—
Well said, my hearts.—You are a princox, go.
Be quiet, or—More light, more light!—for shame,
I’ll make you quiet.—What, cheerly, my hearts!
Patience perforce with willful choler meeting
Makes my flesh tremble in their different greeting.
I will withdraw, but this intrusion shall,
Now seeming sweet, convert to bitt’rest gall.

ROMEO
taking Juliet’s hand
If I profane with my unworthiest hand
This holy shrine, the gentle sin is this:
My lips, two blushing pilgrims, ready stand
To smooth that rough touch with a tender kiss.

JULIET:
Good pilgrim, you do wrong your hand too much,
Which mannerly devotion shows in this;
For saints have hands that pilgrims’ hands do touch,
And palm to palm is holy palmers’ kiss.

ROMEO:
Have not saints lips, and holy palmers too?

JULIET:
Ay, pilgrim, lips that they must use in prayer.

ROMEO:
O then, dear saint, let lips do what hands do.
They pray: grant thou, lest faith turn to despair.

JULIET:
Saints do not move, though grant for prayers’ sake.

ROMEO
He kisses her.

JULIET
ROMEO
He kisses her.

JULIET
NURSE enters
Juliet moves toward her mother.

ROMEO:
Madam, your mother craves a word with you.

JULIET:
What is her mother?

NURSE:
Marry, bachelor,
Her mother is the lady of the house,
And a good lady, and a wise and virtuous.
I nursed her daughter that you talked withal.
I tell you, he that can lay hold of her
Shall have the chinks.

ROMEO
aside:
Is she a Capulet?
O dear account! My life is my foe’s debt.

JULIET
away from ROMEO
What’s this? What’s this?
A rhyme I learned even now
Of one I danced withal.

JULIET:
Anon, anon.
Come, let’s away. The strangers all are gone.

Chorus enters

CHORUS
Now old desire doth in his deathbed lie,
And young affection gapes to be his heir.
That fair for which love groaned for and would die,
With tender Juliet matched, is now not fair.
Now Romeo is beloved and loves again,
Alike bewitchèd by the charm of looks,
But to his foe supposed he must complain,
And she steal love’s sweet bait from fearful hooks.
Being held a foe, he may not have access
To breathe such vows as lovers use to swear,
And she as much in love, her means much less
To meet her new belovèd anywhere.
But passion lends them power, time means, to meet,
Temp’ring extremities with extreme sweet.

ROMEO
He withdraws.

BENVOLIO
Enter Benvolio with Mercutio.
ACT 2
Scene 1

Enter BENVOLIO and MERCUTIO.

BENVOLIO:
Romeo, my cousin Romeo, Romeo!

MERCUTIO:
He is wise,
And, on my life, hath stol'n him home to bed.
He ran this way and leapt this orchard wall.

BENVOLIO:
Call, good Mercutio.

MERCUTIO:
Nay, I’ll conjure too.
Romeo! Humors! Madman! Passion! Lover!
Appear thou in the likeness of a sigh.
Speak but one rhyme and I am satisfied.
Cry but “Ay me,” pronounce but “love” and “dove.”
Speak to my gossip Venus one fair word,
One nickname for her purblind son and heir,
Young Abraham Cupid, he that shot so trim
When King Cophetua loved the beggar maid.—
He heareth not, he stirreth not, he moveth not.
The ape is dead, and I must conjure him.—
I conjure thee by Rosaline’s bright eyes,
By her high forehead, and her scarlet lip,
By her fine foot, straight leg, and quivering thigh,
And the demesnes that there adjacent lie,
That in thy likeness thou appear to us.

BENVOLIO:
An if he hear thee, thou wilt anger him.

MERCUTIO:
This cannot anger him. ’Twould anger him
To raise a spirit in his mistress’ circle
Of some strange nature, letting it there stand
Till she had laid it and conjured it down.
That were some spite. My invocation
Is fair and honest. In his mistress’ name,
I conjure only but to raise up him.
Come, he hath hid himself among these trees.

They exit.

ACT 2
Scene 2

Enter ROMEO.

ROMEO:
To be consorted with the humorous night.
Blind is his love and best befits the dark.
If love be blind, love cannot hit the mark.
Now will he sit under a medlar tree
And wish his mistress were that kind of fruit
As maids call medlars when they laugh alone.—
O Romeo, that she were, O, that she were
An open-arse, thou a pop’rin pear.
Romeo, good night. I’ll to my truckle bed;
This field-bed is too cold for me to sleep.—
Come, shall we go?

BENVOLIO:
Go, then, for ’tis in vain
To seek him here that means not to be found.
They exit.

Enter ROMEO.

ROMEO:
He jests at scars that never felt a wound.
Enter JULIET above.

ROMEO:
But soft, what light through yonder window breaks?
It is the East, and Juliet is the sun.
Arise, fair sun, and kill the envious moon,
Who is already sick and pale with grief
That thou, her maid, art far more fair than she.
Be not her maid since she is envious.
Her vestal livery is but sick and green,
And none but fools do wear it. Cast it off.
It is my lady. O, it is my love!
O, that she knew she were!
She speaks, yet she says nothing. What of that?
Her eye discourses; I will answer it.

Aside:
O, speak again, bright angel, for thou art
As glorious to this night, being o’er my head,
As is a wingèd messenger of heaven
Unto the white-upturned, wondering eyes
Of mortals that fall back to gaze on him
When he bestrides the lazy, puffing clouds
And sails upon the bosom of the air.

JULIET:
O Romeo, Romeo, wherefore art thou Romeo?
Deny thy father and refuse thy name,
Or, if thou wilt not, be but sworn my love,
And I’ll no longer be a Capulet.

ROMEO:
[Aside] Shall I hear more, or shall I speak at this?
’Tis but thy name that is my enemy.
Thou art thyself, though not a Montague.
What’s Montague? It is nor hand, nor foot,
Nor arm, nor face. O, be some other name
Belonging to a man.
What’s in a name? That which we call a rose
By any other name would smell as sweet.


ACT 2, SCENE 2

ROMEO
By any other word would smell as sweet.
So Romeo would, were he not Romeo called,
Retain that dear perfection which he owes
Without that title. Romeo, doff thy name,
And, for thy name, which is no part of thee,
Take all myself.

JULIET
I take thee at thy word.
Call me but love, and I’ll be new baptized.
Henceforth I never will be Romeo.

ROMEO
What man art thou that, thus bescreened in night,
So stumblest on my counsel?

JULIET
By a name
I know not how to tell thee who I am.
My name, dear saint, is hateful to myself
Because it is an enemy to thee.
Had I it written, I would tear the word.
My ears have yet not drunk a hundred words
Of thy tongue’s uttering, yet I know the sound.
Art thou not Romeo, and a Montague?

ROMEO
Neither, fair maid, if either thee dislike.

JULIET
How camest thou hither, tell me, and wherefore?
The orchard walls are high and hard to climb,
And the place death, considering who thou art,
If any of my kinsmen find thee here.

ROMEO
With love’s light wings did I o’erperch these walls,
For stony limits cannot hold love out,
And what love can do, that dares love attempt.
Therefore thy kinsmen are no stop to me.

JULIET
If they do see thee, they will murder thee.

ROMEO
Alack, there lies more peril in thine eye
Than twenty of their swords. Look thou but sweet,
And I am proof against their enmity.

JULIET
I would not for the world they saw thee here.
I have night’s cloak to hide me from their eyes,
And, but thou love me, let them find me here.
My life were better ended by their hate
Than death proroguèd, wanting of thy love.

ROMEO
By whose direction found’st thou out this place?

JULIET
By love, that first did prompt me to inquire.
He lent me counsel, and I lent him eyes.
I am no pilot; yet, wert thou as far
As that vast shore washed with the farthest sea,
I should adventure for such merchandise.

ROMEO
Thou knowest the mask of night is on my face,
Else would a maiden blush bepaint my cheek
For that which thou hast heard me speak tonight.
Fain would I dwell on form; fain, fain deny
What I have spoke. But farewell compliment.
Dost thou love me? I know thou wilt say “Ay,”
And I will take thy word. Yet, if thou swear’st,
Thou mayst prove false. At lovers’ perjuries,
They say, Jove laughs. O gentle Romeo,
If thou dost love, pronounce it faithfully.
Or, if thou thinkest I am too quickly won,
I’ll frown and be perverse and say thee nay,
So thou wilt woo, but else not for the world.
In truth, fair Montague, I am too fond,
And therefore thou mayst think my behavior light.
But trust me, gentleman, I’ll prove more true
Than those that have more coying to be strange.

ROMEO
I should have been more strange, I must confess,
But that thou overheard’st ere I was ware
My true-love passion. Therefore pardon me,
And not impute this yielding to light love,
Which the dark night hath so discoverèd.

JULIET
Lady, by yonder blessèd moon I vow,
That tips with silver all these fruit-tree tops—

ROMEO
O, swear not by the moon, th’ inconstant moon,
That monthly changes in her circled orb,
Lest that thy love prove likewise variable.

JULIET
What shall I swear by?

ROMEO
Do not swear at all.
Or, if thou wilt, swear by thy gracious self,
Which is the god of my idolatry,
And I’ll believe thee.

JULIET
If my heart’s dear love—
Well, do not swear. Although I joy in thee,
I have no joy of this contract tonight.
It is too rash, too unadvised, too sudden,
Too like the lightning, which doth cease to be
Ere one can say “It lightens.” Sweet, good night.
This bud of love, by summer’s ripening breath,
May prove a beauteous flower when next we meet.
Good night, good night. As sweet repose and rest
Come to thy heart as that within my breast.

ROMEO
O, wilt thou leave me so unsatisfied?

JULIET
What satisfaction canst thou have tonight?

ROMEO
Th’ exchange of thy love’s faithful vow for mine.

JULIET
I gave thee mine before thou didst request it,
And yet I would it were to give again.
Wouldst thou withdraw it? For what purpose, love?

ROMEO
But to be frank and give it thee again.
And yet I wish but for the thing I have.
My bounty is as boundless as the sea,
My love as deep. The more I give to thee,
The more I have, for both are infinite.

JULIET
I hear some noise within. Dear love, adieu.
Anon, good nurse. Sweet Montague, be true.
Stay but a little; I will come again.

ROMEO
O blessèd, blessèd night! I am afeard,
Being in night, all this is but a dream,
Too flattering sweet to be substantial.

JULIET (reentering above)
Three words, dear Romeo, and good night indeed.
If that thy bent of love be honorable,
Thy purpose marriage, send me word tomorrow,
By one that I’ll procure to come to thee,
Where and what time thou wilt perform the rite,
And all my fortunes at thy foot I’ll lay
And follow thee my lord throughout the world.

NURSE (from within)
Madam.

JULIET
I come anon.—But if thou meanest not well,
I do beseech thee—
(aside) By and by, I come.—

ROMEO
To cease thy strife and leave me to my grief.
Tomorrow will I send.

JULIET
Good night, good night!
As sweet repose and rest
Come to thy heart as that within my breast.
O, wilt thou leave me so unsatisfied?

ROMEO
What satisfaction canst thou have tonight?
Th’ exchange of thy love’s faithful vow for mine.

(They continue exchanging goodbyes as Juliet’s nurse calls again from within the house.)
ACT 2. SCENE 3
[ROMEO and JULIET]

JULIET
She exits.

ROMEO
He exits.

FRIAR LAWRENCE
And I’ll still stay, to have thee still forget,
Forgetting any other home but this.
’Tis almost morning. I would have thee gone,
And yet no farther than a wanton’s bird,
That lets it hop a little from his hand,
Like a poor prisoner in his twisted gyves,
And with a silken thread plucks it back again,
So loving-jealous of his liberty.
I would I were thy bird.

JULIET
Sweet, so would I.

ROMEO
Yet I should kill thee with much cherishing.
Good night, good night. Parting is such sweet sorrow
That I shall say “Good night” till it be morrow.
Sleep dwell upon thine eyes, peace in thy breast.
Would I were sleep and peace so sweet to rest.
Hence will I to my ghostly friar’s close cell,
His help to crave, and my dear hap to tell.

Enter Friar Lawrence alone with a basket.

FRIAR LAWRENCE
The gray-eyed morn smiles on the frowning night,
Check’ring the eastern clouds with streaks of light,
And fleckled darkness like a drunkard reels
From forth day’s path and Titan’s fiery wheels.
Now, ere the sun advance his burning eye,
The day to cheer and night’s dank dew to dry.

[FRIAR LAWRENCE continues alone]
I must upfill this osier cage of ours
With baleful weeds and precious-juicèd flowers.
The Earth that’s nature’s mother is her tomb;
What is her burying grave, that is her womb;
And from her womb children of divers kind
We sucking on her natural bosom find,
Many for many virtues excellent,
None but for some, and yet all different.
O, mickle is the powerful grace that lies
In plants, herbs, stones, and their true qualities.
For naught so vile that on the Earth doth live
But to the Earth some special good doth give;
Nor aught so good but, strained from that fair use,
Revolts from true birth, stumbling on abuse.
Virtue itself turns vice, being misapplied,
And vice sometime by action dignified.

[Enter ROMEO]

FRIAR LAWRENCE
Within the infant rind of this weak flower
Poison hath residence and medicine power:
For this, being smelt, with that part cheers each part;
Being tasted, stays all senses with the heart.
Two such opposèd kings encamp them still
In man as well as herbs—grace and rude will;
And where the worser is predominant,
Full soon the canker death eats up that plant.

ROMEO
Good morrow, father.

FRIAR LAWRENCE
Benedicite.
What early tongue so sweet saluteth me?
Young son, it argues a distempered head
So soon to bid “Good morrow” to thy bed.
Care keeps his watch in every old man’s eye,
And, where care lodges, sleep will never lie;
But where unbruisèd youth with unstuffed brain
Doth couch his limbs, there golden sleep doth reign.
Therefore thy earliness doth me assure
Thou art uproused with some distemp’rature,
Or, if not so, then here I hit it right:
Our Romeo hath not been in bed tonight.

ROMEO
That last is true. The sweeter rest was mine.
God pardon sin! Wast thou with Rosaline?

FRIAR LAWRENCE
With Rosaline, my ghostly father? No.
I have forgot that name and that name’s woe.

FRIAR LAWRENCE
That’s my good son. But where hast thou been then?

ROMEO
I’ll tell thee ere thou ask it me again.
I have been feasting with mine enemy,
Where on a sudden one hath wounded me
That’s by me wounded. Both our remedies
Within thy help and holy physic lies.
I bear no hatred, blessèd man, for, lo,
My intercession likewise steads my foe.

FRIAR LAWRENCE
Be plain, good son, and homely in thy drift.
Riddling confession finds but riddling shrift.

ROMEO
Then plainly know my heart’s dear love is set
On the fair daughter of rich Capulet.
As mine on hers, so hers is set on mine,
And all combined, save what thou must combine
By holy marriage. When and where and how
We met, we wooed, and made exchange of vow
I’ll tell thee as we pass, but this I pray,
That thou consent to marry us today.

FRIAR LAWRENCE
Holy Saint Francis, what a change is here!
Is Rosaline, that thou didst love so dear,
So soon forsaken? Young men’s love then lies
Not truly in their hearts, but in their eyes.
Jesu Maria, what a deal of brine
Hath washed thy sallow cheeks for Rosaline!
How much salt water thrown away in waste
To season love, that of it doth not taste!
The sun not yet thy sighs from heaven clears,
Thy old groans yet ringing in mine ancient ears.
Lo, here upon thy cheek the stain doth sit
Of an old tear that is not washed off yet.
If e’er thou wast thyself, and these woes thine,
Thou and these woes were all for Rosaline.
And art thou changed? Pronounce this sentence then:
Women may fall when there’s no strength in men.

ROMEO
Thou chid’st me oft for loving Rosaline.
For doting, not for loving, pupil mine.
And bad’st me bury love.
Not in a grave
To lay one in, another out to have.
I pray thee, chide me not. Her I love now
Doth grace for grace and love for love allow.
The other did not so.

FRIAR LAWRENCE
O, she knew well
Thy love did read by rote, that could not spell.
But come, young waverer, come, go with me.
In one respect I’ll thy assistant be,
For this alliance may so happy prove
To turn your households’ rancor to pure love.

ACT 2. SCENE 4

Enter Mercutio and Benvolio.

MERCUTIO
O, let us hence. I stand on sudden haste.

BENVOLIO
Wisely and slow. They stumble that run fast.

MERCUTIO
Where the devil should this Romeo be?
Came he not home tonight?

BENVOLIO
Not to his father’s. I spoke with his man.

MERCUTIO
Why, that same pale hard-hearted wench, that
Rosaline,
Torments him so that he will sure run mad.
Tybalt, the kinsman to old Capulet,
Hath sent a letter to his father’s house.
A challenge, on my life.

BENVOLIO
Romeo will answer it.

MERCUTIO
Any man that can write may answer a letter.
Nay, he will answer the letter’s master, how
he dares, being dared.

BENVOLIO
Alas, poor Romeo, he is already dead,
stabbed with a white wench’s black eye, run
through the ear with a love-song, the very pin of his
heart cleft with the blind bow-boy’s butt shaft. And
is he a man to encounter Tybalt?

MERCUTIO
Why, what is Tybalt?

BENVOLIO
More than prince of cats. O, he’s the courageous
captain of compliments. He fights as you sing
prick-song, keeps time, distance, and proportion.

The scene continues with banter between Mercutio, Benvolio, and the arrival of Romeo.
ACT 2, SCENE 5

Enter NURSE and PETER.

JULIET:
Driving back shadows over louring hills.
Therefore do nimble-pinioned doves draw Love,
And therefore hath the wind-swift Cupid wings.
Now is the sun upon the highmost hill
Of this day’s journey, and from nine till twelve
Is three long hours, yet she is not come.
Had she affections and warm youthful blood,
She would be as swift in motion as a ball;
My words would bandy her to my sweet love,
And his to me.
But old folks, many feign as they were dead,
Unwieldy, slow, heavy, and pale as lead.

Enter Nurse and Peter.

JULIET (cont’d):
O God, she comes!—O, honey nurse, what news?
Hast thou met with him? Send thy man away.
Peter, stay at the gate.
Now, good sweet nurse—O Lord, why lookest thou sad?
Though news be sad, yet tell them merrily.
If good, thou shamest the music of sweet news
By playing it to me with so sour a face.
I am aweary. Give me leave awhile.
Fie, how my bones ache! What a jaunt have I!
I would thou hadst my bones, and I thy news.
Nay, come, I pray thee, speak. Good, good nurse, speak.

NURSE:
Jesu, what haste! Can you not stay awhile?
Do you not see that I am out of breath?

JULIET:
How art thou out of breath, when thou hast breath
To say to me that thou art out of breath?
The excuse that thou dost make in this delay
Is longer than the tale thou dost excuse.
Is thy news good or bad? Answer to that.
Say either, and I’ll stay the circumstance.
Let me be satisfied; is ’t good or bad?

NURSE:
Well, you have made a simple choice. You know
not how to choose a man. Romeo? No, not he.
Though his face be better than any man’s, yet his leg
excels all men’s, and for a hand and a foot and a
body, though they be not to be talked on, yet they
are past compare. He is not the flower of courtesy,
but I’ll warrant him as gentle as a lamb. Go thy
ways, wench. Serve God. What, have you dined at
home?

JULIET:
No, no. But all this did I know before.
What says he of our marriage? What of that?

NURSE:
Lord, how my head aches! What a head have I!
It beats as it would fall in twenty pieces.
My back o’ t’ other side! Ah, my back, my back!
Beshrew your heart for sending me about
To catch my death with jaunting up and down.
I’ faith, I am sorry that thou art not well.
Sweet, sweet, sweet nurse, tell me, what says my love?

NURSE:
Your love says, like an honest gentleman, and a
courteous, and a kind, and a handsome, and, I
warrant, a virtuous—Where is your mother?

JULIET:
Where is my mother? Why, she is within.
Where should she be? How oddly thou repliest:
“Your love says, like an honest gentleman,
Where is your mother?”

NURSE:
O God’s lady dear,
Are you so hot? Marry, come up, I trow.

JULIET:
Is this the poultice for my aching bones?
Henceforward do your messages yourself.
Here’s such a coil. Come, what says Romeo?
Have you got leave to go to shrift today?

JULIET (cont’d):
I have.
Then hie you hence to Friar Lawrence’ cell.
There stays a husband to make you a wife.
Now comes the wanton blood up in your cheeks;
They’ll be in scarlet straight at any news.
Hie you to church. I must another way,
To fetch a ladder by the which your love
Must climb a bird’s nest soon when it is dark.
I am the drudge and toil in your delight,
But you shall bear the burden soon at night.
Go. I’ll to dinner. Hie you to the cell.
Hie to high fortune! Honest nurse, farewell.
Act 3, Scene 1
TYBALT
(They fight. Tybalt falls.)

BENVOLIO
Romeo, away, begone! The citizens are up, and Tybalt slain. Stand not amazed. The Prince will doom thee death if thou art taken. Hence, be gone, away!

ROMEO
O, I am Fortune’s fool! Why dost thou stay?

(Enter Citizens.)

CITIZEN
Which way ran he that killed Mercutio?

BENVOLIO
Tybalt, that murderer, which way ran he?

CITIZEN
There lies that Tybalt.

BENVOLIO
Up, sir, go with me. I charge thee in the Prince’s name, obey.

(Enter Prince, Montague, Capulet, their Wives, and all.)

PRINCE
Where are the vile beginners of this fray?

BENVOLIO
O noble prince, I can discover all the unlucky manage of this fatal brawl. There lies the man, slain by young Romeo, that slew thy kinsman, brave Mercutio.

LADY CAPULET
Tybalt, my cousin! O, my brother’s child! O prince! O cousin! Husband! O, the blood is spilled of my dear kinsman! Prince, as thou art true...

BENVOLIO
Benvolio, who began this bloody fray?

BENVOLIO
Tybalt, here slain, whom Romeo’s hand did slay. Romeo, that spoke him fair, bid him bethink how nice the quarrel was, and urged withal your high displeasure. All this uttered with gentle breath, calm look, knees humbly bowed, could not take truce with the unruly spleen of Tybalt, deaf to peace, but that he tilts with piercing steel at bold Mercutio’s breast.

(He continues explaining the events leading to Tybalt’s death.)

PRINCE
Benvolio, who began this bloody fray?

LADY CAPULET
Romeo slew Tybalt; Romeo must not live.

BENVOLIO
He is a kinsman to the Montague. Affection makes him false; he speaks not true.

PRINCE
For blood of ours, shed blood of Montague.

BENVOLIO
Romeo, that spoke him fair, bid him bethink how nice the quarrel was, and urged withal your high displeasure.
